We departed JFK Airport on the evening of April 22
and arrived in Warsaw, Poland the next day.
Though parts of Warsaw date back to the medieval period
in the 13th and 14th centuries, it is very much a modern city.
Shining new skyscrapers have mushroomed.
As in every large city, Warsaw's inhabitants have to deal
with heavy traffic and noise.
So how refreshing it was to arrive at the branch office,
located in a small village, a few miles southwest of Warsaw.
It is an attractive complex of buildings with a beautifully designed courtyard.
It was a pleasure to meet the 148 members of the Bethel family in their department,
such as the laundry, the sign language department,
and the broadcasting department.
The translation department has been very busy translating in three new languages,
Kazubian, Celesian, and Romani.
They produce the video, why study the Bible in these local languages.
It was thrilling to see people watching the video
in their mother tongues with tears in their eyes.
In March 2016, publishers in a small town preached
among the community of Roma people, inviting them to the memorial.
Twenty-four of them came or every fourth person in the town.
The talk given in Romani was transmitted from a congregation in London.
They were touched.
One young Roma man told the brothers,
this has reached my heart.
I would like to become God's servant to be God's child.
Though a large percentage of the Bethel family is young in years,
the old timers are treasured for their very rich history of faithfulness under trial.
Here are two widows, from left to right, Zovia Shider, and Anela Adak.
They were able to assist Alice to identify brothers and sisters
in a photo of the Bethel family taken in 1992.
Both sisters' husbands had taken the lead in the Polish field
for many decades while under ban.
Sister Adak herself was in prison three times.
How did she keep herself strong during those difficult times?
She persistently prayed, and when she was permitted to go to the library,
she eagerly read the Bible there,
and would even memorize whole chapters.
You could not help but be inspired by these loyal humble sisters
whose faith conquered the world.
On Saturday, April 30, we traveled to the Warsaw Assembly Hall for the special meeting.
Practically the whole country was tied in by streaming via the Internet.
The total attendance was 118,725.
Has the newer generation of witnesses in Poland fully entered the door of activity
open to them in May 1989 when witnesses were legally recognized?
The Branch Committee confirmed that in 1989,
there were 91,000 kingdom publishers.
Today, there are over 122,000.
There is good potential for further growth since 191,524 attended the last memorial.
Also, many young ones are being taught to love Jehovah by their God-fearing parents.
Young ones are mastering up boldness to witness as this experience illustrates.
Natalie, a regular pioneer, studies the Bible with a woman who has an 11-year-old daughter, Michelle.
As school, Michelle was assigned to prepare a presentation on a religion of her choice.
Well, her mother and father grew up in families of witnesses, but never progressed to baptism.
Still, Michelle felt this was her religion.
She prepared slides and videos from our website.
Michelle's teacher was so impressed, she arranged for Natalie to come to further explain things.
Natalie conducted a question and answer session based on the Awake article
in the first issue of 2016 entitled, What Do You Know About Jehovah's Witnesses?
After the presentation, all were invited to come to the Kingdom Hall for a guided tour.
Twenty children and two teachers came to the Kingdom Hall.
They were shown all its features.
They saw the video, what happens at the Kingdom Hall.
The children were allowed to use the microphones to see what it's like to give a comment.
Since they had also visited a mosque and a church, they were asked what differences they noticed
between those places and the Kingdom Hall.
Their personal comments were very touching, including one boy who stated, You are so open to others.
At the end, much literature was placed.
11-year-old Michelle was very proud and happy.
Some students told her that her religion is really cool.
It was time to say goodbye to the Poland Bethel family.
Our next stop was Levive Ukraine.
Levive is considered Ukraine's most cultural and elegant city.
Being more than 750 years old, it has a lot of history behind it.
Just three miles north of Levive in the midst of a picturesque pine forest
is a lovely Ukraine branch office.
The beautiful grounds are well maintained by commuters and Bethelites.
We knew we were in for a wonderful visit
by the warm welcome we received on our arrival.
The branch committee is thrilled to see how Jehovah has blessed the work in this country.
In 1991, we were officially registered in Ukraine.
The door had swung wide open for the preaching work.
At that time, there were about 25,000 publishers.
Have the brothers vigorously entered that door of activity since that year?
They surely have.
Today, there are 141,000 publishers.
The 2016 memorial attendance was over 242,000.
Here you see the happy missionaries.
They have reason to be joyful considering the fertile territory in which they were.
At the special meeting, that originated at the Bethel Auditorium.
Brother Callisto gave a report on the activity of the branch.
Especially noteworthy were his comments about eastern Ukraine.
You likely remember that in 2014,
a conflict broke out in this region.
A ceasefire was declared in 2015,
but there still is much civil unrest in tension.
How have the almost 10,000 publishers in this region fared?
Brother Callisto interviewed one of the six courageous circuit overseers
who served in eastern Ukraine,
brother Ivan Nebara,
and his equally courageous wife Anna.
Brother Nebara informed us that for the first time in two and a half years,
they were able to hold a meeting with the pioneers.
Look at those happy faces.
Even though some of our dear brothers must travel long distances to meet at their kingdom hall,
they do so to keep themselves built up.
For example, during brother Nebara's visit,
this 91-year-old sister,
though living far from the kingdom hall,
was present at all the morning groups for service,
and then would go out again in the afternoons.
Her faithfulness is a blessing to the brothers.
Many brothers live in areas where there is much devastation.
Roon buildings and fences riddled with bullet holes
remind them of the presence of the military.
Preaching from house to house has resumed,
and in some areas, public witnessing is possible.
Well, we were all encouraged by this report.
These special meeting talks were translated simultaneously into five languages,
and were transmitted to all the congregations,
including those in eastern Ukraine.
We were pleased to hear the final attendance figure for the special meeting,
a 144,944.
The spirit of the Ukraine Bethel family is outstanding.
There are many young ones, some relatively new in the truth,
and others whose family members were exiled to Siberia during Stalin's time.
The special meal with the family included a chorus
and traditional Ukrainian folk dancing.
It was a happy time for all.
So the day arrives for us to leave.
It was hard to leave these dear friends.